Interview number three. Interviewer Steve Fletcher, Artistic Director of Swiffer Carnival.
Interviewee Rob Davy. Rob, could you spell your name for us please?
Yes, Rob is R-O-B and Davy is D-A-V-E-Y.
Thank you very much. So please, can you tell us how did you first get involved with the Cardiff Mars Carnival?
Yes, I remember it well actually. 1992, my wife Alva got herself involved in the carnival, which I think was held at Fitzallum that year.
And my recollection of that year is that I was working most of the time, but came down on odd occasions during the evening to have a look and see exactly what my wife had got herself and our children involved in.
And thought it probably wasn't really for me. It seemed to be a lot of sewing and chatting and a huge amount of material going on there.
And it didn't seem to be something that I really wanted to get myself involved in.
However, I certainly watched that carnival and then the next year I decided that if I had any chance of actually seeing my wife and children for three weeks that summer, and probably the forthcoming summers, I'd probably have to get involved myself.
And that's really what I did. And I think that year I messed about with some face paints, did a bit of stewarding and generally caught the bug.
And then the following year, which was 1994, the blues year as I recall, there was a lot of blue paint going around, which left an indelible stain on our bath, at least for many, many weeks.
I did actually get myself into a costume, something that I would never have thought I would ever have done.
And we never looked back for the next sort of eight, nine years, I think. Got myself into costume every year.
Messed about, sang a lot of songs, chanted a lot of chants and generally had a good time.
Is there one costume in particular that's a standout costume for you out of the many that you've played over the years?
Yeah, I think so. I think it's pretty obvious. I think it generally agreed amongst the family is probably the player of games, which was, I don't know when that was, mid to late 90s probably.
I don't know whose idea it was, but I know my wife made the costume.
And I remember standing on the steps of the museum wearing this darn costume.
And it was a pretty, pretty smart costume actually. I enjoyed wearing that one.
In terms of the value of Carnival and its impact, if you had to describe some of the benefits that perhaps you've seen personally or amongst your family or as a long time, you know, 10 years of Carnival involvement, you'll have seen a lot.
How does it affect people?
Well, I think from this perspective, which is some time after, we've not done it for a number of years now because we moved away from Carnival, so we've not been able to really.
I think it's fair to say that it's definitely changed and enhanced our lives.
But I think more than that, I think it's actually informed our kids' lives because they started doing Carnival when they were quite young, I don't know, about nine and eleven, something like that.
And I don't think there's any question that as far as they're concerned, their lives have been changed because of it.
For instance, my son Guy went into theatre where he remains, and I think that was certainly helped by being involved in M.A.S.
And Tasha, my daughter, went to Africa, went to Senegal and married a Senegalese man.
And I think the fact that we lived on the face of it, a suburban middle class life in Cardiff, would have meant it would have been quite difficult for us to have been involved in and with the sort of people that M.A.S. brought us into contact with.
And whilst I think we had the values of multiculturalism and integration with other groups of people, I think it would have been difficult to realise without the M.A.S.
And I think that's what the M.A.S. has done for us and has done for many people.
It's brought people together who otherwise wouldn't have come together.
I think that's its essence, really.
You mentioned chanting earlier. Do you recall any of the chants? Would you care to share one with us for posterity?
Ah, well, yes. I do recall the chants. I remember my kids getting very involved with the workshops.
And actually Tasha, who was quite a small girl then, she was probably only about 10 or 11, leading some of the chants.
And, you know, I think we all recorded them as a family.
And they're certainly somewhere around. I'm not sure if I can remember them well enough to actually sing now, to be honest.
That might come back to me.
No worries.
Obviously, after three weeks of workshop, there's the big blowout, the parade itself.
What kind of audience reactions can you recall?
I remember, in fact, today, because we've been talking about M.A.S. today,
and I was looking at one of my diary entries from the early days.
And I actually said in my diary that I think that was the year I was drumming.
And I actually said I didn't really see anything of the M.A.S. at all.
I didn't really know what was going on. I was so involved with the drumming.
And because drumming certainly wasn't my forte, I think I was doing a lot of counting during the M.A.S. itself.
So certainly that one, I didn't really see much of at all.
Gradually, as I got more used to the M.A.S., I think you tend to look up and look around.
And I just remember huge crowds lining the streets.
And I do remember wishing that the crowd would actually interact more with the actual M.A.S.
And I think, in a way, we were doing it for ourselves.
I think it was a wonderful thing for people, and people kept coming year after year to watch us.
But I know that within the M.A.S. group, we were doing it because we wanted to do it more than the crowd.
And personally, I wasn't ever that aware of the crowd. I knew that they were there.
I do remember one year with Jouvet, which is the night before the carnival,
cruising through the café-courter in Cardiff, which had just then opened.
It was a brand new café-courter.
And something that we hadn't really ever seen before, people sitting outside on the pavements drinking and eating,
and getting a huge response from them.
But during the actual M.A.S. itself, I was pretty wrapped up in what we were doing, really,
to be anything other than just vaguely aware of this huge body of people somewhere around us.
Unless you care to give us a chance, I think that was the top-holy interview.
You touched on everything I could hope for.
I don't feel obliged to ask the chant for it, because Natasha really did sing it hard.
Yeah, no, that's fine. I'll leave that to Natasha to take care of it.
Thank you very much, Lars. Switch that off.
That was brilliant. There was a number of...